F-1 students may apply to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) for
Post-Completion Optional Practical Training (OPT) work authorization, which helps them
apply their classroom learning to the real-world.
Post-Completion Optional Practical Training (Post-OPT) is a type of employment
authorization adjudicated by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). It is
available to eligible F-1 students for the purpose of gaining practical experience directly
related to their program of study. A Post-OPT application first requires an OPT
recommendation on a student's Form I-20, then a timely application to USCIS for final
adjudication. If successful, USCIS will issue an Employment Authorization Document (EAD).
Students may apply for a maximum of 12-months of Post-Completion OPT upon completion
of each higher degree level. Only one Post-Completion OPT application is allowed per
academic degree level (i.e. Bachelor’s, Master’s, PhD).
You may apply for Post-Completion OPT only if all of the following criteria have been met:
• You have maintained a valid F-1 student status
• You have been enrolled full-time for at least one academic year
• You have completed fewer than 365 days of full-time Curricular Practical Training
(CPT) at the degree level for which you are applying for OPT
• You have completed all coursework (may be in final stages of thesis/dissertation)
• You are inside the U.S.
If you depart the U.S. before your OPT application has been filed, received and receipted by
the USCIS, you become ineligible to apply for Post-Completion OPT if your program has
ended.
You may apply to USCIS for Post-Completion OPT work authorization no earlier than 90
days prior to your program completion date. Post-OPT applications cannot be submitted to
USCIS later than 60 days after the program completion date (i.e. during the 60-day grace
period).
The program end date on your I-20 is an estimated program end date, which may be
different from your actual program end date. You must apply for OPT based on your last
registered term. For immigration purposes, program completion date corresponds with the
last term of enrollment, not necessarily the date of the graduation ceremony or degree
conferral date.
For example, if you finish all of your courses in May, but your degree conferral is in August,
your I-20 end date will be a May date if you have no registration over the summer.
Students in the PhD program may choose the date of completion based on any of the
following dates:
• Dissertation defense date, or
• Dissertation/correction submission date, or
• End of last registered term
If you have not used any Pre-Completion OPT time, you may request up to 12-months of
Post-Completion OPT. You must request a start date within the 60-day grace period of your
program. You select your own start and end date for OPT (even if you do not yet have a job
offer).
Here are some general suggestions to help you make the best decision for your situation:
• If you have a job offer and your job starts during your 60-day grace period, use the
job start date (or earlier) as your requested start of OPT
• If you have a job offer and it starts after your 60-day grace period, use the latest date
possible (59th day of grace period) for your OPT start date
If a PhD student has completed all their coursework but is in the final stages of
thesis/dissertation, immigration regulations allow the student to apply for either PreCompletion OPT or Post-Completion OPT while completing their thesis/dissertation.
In this case, the PhD student and their college need to determine the end date of program
completion, and the student’s I-20 will be updated to reflect it as the completion date of
the program.
If you choose to apply for Post-Completion OPT while completing thesis/dissertation:
• You must fulfill the reporting requirements of Post-Completion OPT
• Days you do not have a job count toward 90 days of unemployment time
• You cannot request program extension even if your thesis/dissertation is not
completed after Post-Completion OPT is expired
Below are the steps to apply for Employment Authorization Card
Step 1: Log in to myOGS:
Log in to Office of Global Services Post-Completion Optional Practical Training Central.
Step 2: Complete the Post-OPT Quiz:
Complete and pass the OPT Quiz through Optional Practical Training Central.
Step 3: Submit the Post-OPT I-20 Request to OGS:
Submit Post-Completion OPT Recommendation Request through Optional Practical
Training Central.
You must upload the following documents on the e-form:
• Copy of completed Certification of Program Completion
• Copy of passport identity page
• Electronic I-94 printout
• Screenshot of $200 Post Graduation Fee receipt (paid through NUPay in the Student
Hub)
OGS requires 15 business days to process a request for Post-Completion OPT
recommendation.
Step 4: Prepare your OPT Application for USCIS:
NEW! How F-1 Students Seeking OPT Can Avoid Form I-765 Delays
Applying Online: You may create an account with USCIS and file the Form I-765 online.
Follow the instructions to File a form online, then Select the form you want to file online (I765, Application for Employment Authorization). You do not need to upload a PDF version
of the Form I-765. Follow the online instructions to prepare to submit the following
documents:
• Copy of Form I-20 with OPT recommendation on page two
o Click here for a sample OPT recommendation on a Form I-20
o Do not submit the Form I-765 without the I-20 with OPT recommendation.
This will result in the denial of your application.
o Please note: you must print the I-20 with OPT recommendation that has
been electronically signed by the DSO, sign the bottom of Page 1 in the
Student Attestation section, then scan a copy of all 3 pages of the fully
signed I-20 to include with your OPT application to USCIS.
• Copies of all previous I-20s that indicate that you were authorized for employment
• Copy of passport identity page — include all correction and extension pages
• Copy of most current F-1 student visa stamp or change of status approval notice
• Copy of most recent electronic I-94 printout or copy of I-94 card (front and back)
• Copy of previous Employment Authorization Document (front and back) – if
applicable
• Two passport photos with white background (photos MUST be less than 30 days old
and glasses should not be worn in photo)
• Copy of your Northeastern transcript (optional)
• $470 OPT application fee (Payment may be made via a credit card, debit card, or
bank transfer. If a credit card is used, it must be issued by a U.S. bank)
Applying by Mail: Submit the documents listed below to USCIS
• Original paper Form I-765 – please refer to OGS’s supplemental I-765 guide for
assistance
• Original G-1145
• Copy of new I-20 with OPT recommendation on page 2
o Click here for a sample OPT recommendation on a Form I-20
o Do not submit the Form I-765 without the I-20 with OPT recommendation.
This will result in the denial of your application
• Copies of all previous I-20s for the current degree level
• Copy of passport identity page — include all correction and extension pages
• Copy of most current F-1 student visa stamp or change of status approval notice
• Copy of most recent electronic I-94 printout or copy of I-94 card (front and back)
• Copy of previous Employment Authorization Document (front and back) – if
applicable
• Two passport photos with white background (lightly write your name and SEVIS ID
number with a pencil on the back of each photo; photos MUST be less than 30 days
old and glasses should not be worn in photo)
• $520 check, money order or bank check made payable to the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security
• Copy of your Northeastern transcript (optional)
Step 5: (Optional) Premium Processing
In 2023, USCIS introduced the availability of Premium Processing for F-1 students
submitting the Form I-765, Application for Employment Authorization. As of August 2024,
the fee for Premium Processing is $1,685. The fee guarantees the USCIS will take
adjudicative action (approval, denial, request for evidence, notice of intent to deny) on the
case within 30 business days.
Premium Processing can be requested using the Form I-907. Students may request
Premium Processing during their initial submission of the Form I-765 or may upgrade their
request by applying for Premium Processing while their application is pending with USCIS.
Notes from OGS
• Requests for premium processing must be made directly to USCIS. OGS is unable to
assist students with the application process
• Applying for premium processing with USCIS will not impact OGS processing time
• OGS recognizes that not all students will have the means to request premium
processing from USCIS due to its high cost. We recognize the disparity that this may
cause and encourage students to submit their applications as early as possible to
ensure timely adjudication by USCIS
USCIS recommends filing online. However, if you choose to file your application with USCIS
via a mail service, please review these instructions.
Guidance for Mailing an Application to USCIS
We strongly recommend that you make copies of your complete application for your
records before mailing your application to USCIS.
Once you have your documents and I-20 for Post-Completion OPT and you have copied all
documentation and assembled the packet, you must send it to the USCIS address below.
However its always best practice to confirm the most up-to-date USCIS Direct Filing
Addresses for Form I-765 directly on the USCIS website. It is recommended you mail your
OPT packet through certified mail which includes a tracking number and guaranteed
delivery date.
Effective 01/08/2021, you will mail your application to the USCIS Chicago lockbox:
For U.S. Postal Service deliveries:
Attn: I-765 C03
P.O. Box 805373
Chicago, IL 60680-5374
For courier service deliveries (non-U.S. Postal Service: FedEx, UPS, and DHL):
USCIS
Attn: I-765 C03 (Box 805373)
131 South Dearborn – 3rd Floor
Chicago, IL 60603-5517
eShipGlobal mailing option
eShipGlobal offers a shipping service for international students sending their OPT/STEM
application to USCIS. Students can choose their carrier (UPS, FedEx, or USPS) and type of
delivery (next day, 2-day, etc.) and ship at discounted rates. This service is not a
Northeastern service. All inquiries should be directed to eShipGlobal directly.
USCIS Processing Times
• USCIS advertises normal processing time for OPT requests as being around 100
days.
• You can check current processing times on USCIS’s website
After the documentation leaves the respective Lockbox, it is forwarded to the USCIS
Service Center. About fifteen days after USCIS receives your application for PostCompletion OPT, you should receive a receipt notice (Form I-797) from USCIS.
What Happens After I Submit my Application to USCIS?
Receive a receipt notice (Form I-797) from USCIS and wait for adjudication
• You can look up your case status online using the case number
• If you file online you will receive this receipt notice electronically within a day or two.
If you file by mail you should receive this notice within 2-weeks
• If you submitted the G1145 form with your application, you will be informed
electronically by email and/or text
• If you paid for your OPT fee by personal check, the back of the cashed check will
have the number. You may obtain a copy of this check from your bank
• You may contact the USCIS call center at +1-800-375-5283
• You can check USCIS current OPT and STEM OPT estimated processing times on
the USCIS website. (Select Form: “I-765” Form Category: “Based on a request by a
qualified F-1 academic student [(c)(3)]” Service Center: “Potomac Service Center”.
Note: Your application will remain in “pending” status until a decision has been made on
your application (this may be a few months). Adjudication of your application is completed
by USCIS. Therefore, USCIS will inform you directly of the official receipt, request for
additional information, and the decision on your application. Please be aware that this is a
normal processing timeframe, and regrettably, OGS is unable to assist in expediting any
requests.
OGS is here to guide you if you receive any communication from USCIS that requires
response (request for additional information, denial, etc.).
Wait for your Approval Notice and Employment Authorization Document (EAD)
• Once USCIS adjudicates your application and your Post-OPT is approved, expect
to first receive an approval notice and then an EAD
• You must not work until you receive your EAD card and you may only work within the
dates specified on the EAD card
o The EAD card, not your approval notice, is your work authorization
documentation
Can I apply for Premium Processing while my application with USCIS is pending?
F-1 students can request premium processing while their Form I-765 is Pending with
USCIS. You can learn more about Premium Processing on the USCIS website.
I received a Request for Evidence (RFE). What should I do next?
If USCIS determines that something in your application requires further clarification they
will send you a Request for Evidence (RFE). If you receive an RFE, you are required to
respond by the deadline listed on the notification. You will also need to submit a copy of
the RFE to OGS via the OPT Issue Reporting e-form in OPT Central.
Once you have submitted the e-form, a Designated School Official (DSO) will review your
RFE and inform you of next steps. If it is determined that no evidence is needed from OGS
or from your former academic department, you will receive an email with suggestions
about who can provide the requested evidence. If it is determined you need documentation
from OGS or your academic department, you will receive an email stating what additional
documentation will be provided.
RFE Review Process
All RFEs are unique, therefore, all supporting letters and documents are drafted based on
the specific request of the RFE. OGS may have multiple RFE being reviewed
simultaneously, therefore, processing times for RFEs vary based on:
• The complexity of the RFE and number of required supporting documents
• The number of departments that are asked to provide supporting documentation
• The production of the PDSO Letter (the Principal Designated School Official)
• The due date of the RFE
My Post-OPT was denied. What should I do next?
Please upload the denial notice to the OPT Issue Reporting e-form in OPT Central. A DSO
will review the denial notice and advise you on next steps.
My EAD has an error. What should I do next?
If your Form I-765 was approved by USCIS and your EAD card contains incorrect
information due to a USCIS error, you must return the original card along with a detailed
explanation of the error and supporting documentation to USCIS at:
USCIS
Lee’s Summit Production Facility
Attn: I-765 Replacement Cards
7 Product Way
Lee’s Summit, MO 64002
In these cases, you do not need to submit a new Form I-765 and filing fee. The USCIS will
issue a corrected EAD card within 30 days of receiving your EAD card that contains
incorrect information.
If you return your approved EAD card and USCIS determines your card contains incorrect
information that is not due to USCIS error, the EAD will be returned to you. In this case, you
will have to follow the process detailed in the Replacement Employment Authorization
Document section of the Employment Authorization Document page to have your card
corrected.
If you do not find the information you need through online services and need further
assistance, you may contact the National Customer Service Center at 1-800-375-5283 or
1-800-767-1833 Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD).
https://www.uscis.gov/about-us/contact-us/national-customer-service-center
• USCIS must receive the OPT application within 30 days of the issuing OPT
recommendation by OGS; if the application is not received by USCIS within 30 days
after the issuance of the OPT I-20, the application will be denied (this is the most
common reason for the denial of Post-OPT)
• Do not mail in your application so that USCIS receives it more than 90 days before
your program end date or more than 60 days after the program end date.
(Applications received outside of these times will be denied)
• If your entire application is returned to you, consult with an OGS Advisor before
resubmitting the application; your application may not be considered “received”
and you may need a new I-20 with OPT recommendation
• Do not submit an OPT application to USCIS prior to obtaining I-20 with OPT
recommendation
• Do not wait for a job offer in order to start the OPT application process
• Make sure that the address on your OPT application is valid for receiving mail at all
times during OPT processing
• Students must abide by all reporting requirements while on Post-Completion OPT.
Reporting Employment during Post-OPT
It is the responsibility of the student to determine if the accepted employment is related to
his/her program of study and to report all employment to SEVP. You can learn more on our
OPT Employment Reporting page.
The following criteria must be met when you engage in work during Post-OPT:
• You must work a minimum of 20 hours per week
• All work must be directly related to your program of study
When considering work opportunities, the following employment types are permissible for
OPT:
• Paid or unpaid employment
• Multiple employers: you may work for multiple employers while on Post-OPT. All
work obtained must be directly related to your program of study
• Work for hire: This is often referred to as 1099 employment. You can contract
yourself out to a company. (This is similar to working as a freelancer)
• Self-employed/business owner: You may start your own business. (Consult with a
lawyer in order to find out what is needed to start a company)
• Employment through an agency or consulting firm: You may work for a placement
agency or consulting firm. (This experience will usually involve temporary or
contract work)
• Volunteering: Students on Post-OPT may work as volunteers as long as the work is
related to their major field of study and does not violate labor laws
Note: Guidelines for STEM employers differ; please review our STEM OPT page for more
information.
Traveling during Post-OPT
Students on Post-Completion OPT are still in F-1 status and must maintain all F-1 eligibility
documents in order to travel abroad. In order to re-enter the U.S., the following documents
are required:
• A passport that is valid for 6 months from the date of your return to the U.S.
• A valid F-1 student visa
• A valid I-20 with OPT recommendation and a valid travel signature on page 2*
o *Travel signatures are valid for 6 months while you are on OPT.
• A valid EAD
• Proof of employment (an offer letter can be used)
o If you are not currently employed, we do not recommend traveling outside of
the U.S. as re-entry to the U.S. is granted at the discretion of Customs and
Border Protection (CBP)
Given the information above, travel before an EAD card has been approved and received is
not advisable. Note: If you depart the U.S. before your OPT application has been filed,
received, and receipted by the USCIS, you become ineligible to apply for Post-Completion
OPT if your program has ended.
Please see OGS’ page on International Travel for more information
Studying during Post-OPT
While recreational or avocational study is permissible during the Post-Completion OPT
period, students cannot pursue a new degree-seeking program while simultaneously
working on Post-Completion OPT. You should speak with a DSO in OGS to see if your
studies would qualify. U.S. Federal Regulations state that employment authorization is
automatically terminated when a student begins study at another education level or
transfers their SEVIS record to another school.
My application was rejected and returned to me because of a missing signature on I765 or
an issue with my check/money order. What do I do?
Do NOT mail the application yet. Please complete the Optional Practical Training Issue
Reporting Form in Optional Practical Training Central. You should also contact OGS
and make an appointment with an OGS advisor. You will most likely need a new OPT
recommendation and will need to submit a new OPT application to USCIS.
You cannot resubmit your application if there is any chance your I-20 with OPT
recommendation will be more than 30 days old when it is received by USCIS; this would
result in a denial.
I received a Request For Evidence from USCIS. What do I do?
You are required to respond to Request For Evidence by the deadline specified on the letter.
If you can prepare the document(s) they ask for, you may respond on your own. If you have
any questions, you may make an appointment with an OGS advisor. Please also make sure
that you submit your Request For Evidence to the Optional Practical Training Issue Reporting
e-form at Optional Practical Training Central.
How do I change my mailing address while my OPT application is pending with USCIS?
While your application is still pending with USCIS, follow the instructions here.
If you are moving and not just updating the address to which your EAD card should be mailed,
you must also update the OGS with your new address using the Address Update Form.
How do I withdraw my OPT application?
If your application is still pending with USCIS, and you decide not to pursue OPT, you may
withdraw your application. In this case, you will need to mail a letter to request withdrawal
of your application to the USCIS address that’s listed on your receipt notice, and a copy of
your receipt notice.
The letter should include the following elements:
• Note “Re: I-765 Withdrawal” on the letter
• Include biographical information to identify the student, including name, date of
birth, and SEVIS number
• Reference the receipt number for the I-765 application (from the Form I-797 receipt
notice); a copy of the receipt notice can also be helpful
• Specific request that the Form I-765 application for OPT be withdrawn
• Student’s signature
Once your application is withdrawn, you should receive the withdrawal
acknowledgement letter from USCIS. If you do not receive anything within 1 month,
please contact OGS.
NOTE: If you withdraw your OPT application after your program has ended, your 60-day
grace period will go into effect as of the end date of your I-20. If 60 days has passed
since the end of your program, your record will auto-complete when your OPT
application is withdrawn.
Can I request for my application to be expedited by USCIS?
Although USCIS generally does not accept expedite processing, you may try including a
job offer letter and a cover letter explaining your job is expected to start on a certain day
and send them along with the required documents for the Post-Completion OPT
application.
If you already have submitted the application to USCIS, you may call customer service
and ask how to request the expedite processing.
Disclaimer: There is no guarantee that USCIS will honor your request. It is solely the student’s
responsibility to prepare the documents and submit the expedite request. We recommend
that you talk to your employer about changing your employment start date to a later date.
My OPT application was denied. What can I do?
If your OPT application is denied, please wait to receive your denial notice in the mail.
Once you receive it, make an appointment to meet with an OGS advisor to discuss your
situation.
My OPT application has been pending for more than 110 days. What can I do?
Please visit the Department of Homeland Security website to review what to do if your
application has been pending for more than 110 days.
If you have submitted a request to USCIS to review your case and your case has been
pending over 110 days, please submit the “Optional Practical Training Issue Reporting” eform in Optional Practical Training Central. In this e-form, you will be asked what day you
submitted your request to USCIS.
I did not get my EAD card in the mail after receiving the approval notice. What do I do?
Find your tracking number by checking your USCIS Case Status, then contact the United
States Postal Office to see if they can locate your EAD card if it already says “delivered”
status.
If your card is not received within 2-3 weeks of receiving your approval notice or seeing that
your case status shows your card was “delivered,” then you can make an e-request through
USCIS. Please note: This e-request may result in a response from USCIS or it may result in
the production of an EAD card; the production of a new card is estimated to take
approximately 120 days.
For questions about this e-request, please contact USCIS Customer Service at:
1-800-375-5283 or 1-800-767-1833
If it is determined that your EAD card is lost in the mail and you do not want to wait for a
response from USCIS, you will have to apply for a replacement of EAD card by submitting the
following documents to the lockbox, as you did for your initial application. Processing times
will be the same as processing times for the initial OPT application approval.
• Letter explaining what happened to previously issued card (include police report if
applicable)
• I-765 (check the box that indicates that you are applying for a “Replacement” card)
• G-1145
• $410 check, money order or bank check made payable to the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security
• Copies of previous I-20s
• Copy of F-1 visa
• Copy of passport
• Passport photos
• Approval Notice of Optional Practical Training/Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics Optional Practical Training (STEM OPT)
What happens if my EAD card has incorrect information on it?
If your Form I-765 was approved by USCIS and your EAD card contains incorrect information
due to a USCIS error, you must return the original card along with a detailed explanation of
the error and supporting documentation to USCIS at:
USCIS
Lee’s Summit Production Facility
Attn: I-765 Replacement Cards
7 Product Way
Lee’s Summit, MO 64002
In these cases, you do not need to submit a new Form I-765 and filing fee. The USCIS will
issue a corrected EAD card within 30 days of receiving your EAD card that contains incorrect
information.
If you return your approved EAD card and USCIS determines your card contains incorrect
information that is not due to USCIS error, the EAD will be returned to you. In this case, you
will have to follow the process detailed in the Replacement Employment Authorization
Document section of the Employment Authorization Document page to have your card
corrected.
If you do not find the information you need through online services and need further
assistance, you may contact the National Customer Service Center at 1-800-375-5283 or 1-
800-767-1833 Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD).
https://www.uscis.gov/about-us/contact-us/national-customer-service-center
What do I do if I lose my EAD card?
If your card is lost or stolen while you are on OPT, we advise you apply for a replacement card.
You will have to apply for a replacement EAD card by submitting the following documents to
the lockbox, as you did for your initial application:
• Letter explaining what happened to previously issued card (include police report if
applicable)
• I-765 (check the box that indicates that you are applying for a “Replacement” card)
• G-1145
• $410 check, money order or bank check made payable to the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security
• Copies of previous I-20s
• Copy of F-1 visa
• Copy of passport
• Passport photos
• Approval Notice of Optional Practical Training/Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics Optional Practical Training (STEM OPT)
• Copy of EAD card (if available)
My OPT duration is less than 12 months. Is this a mistake?
Per regulations, your OPT end date must be within 14 months of your program end date.
Depending on the OPT application approval date, your OPT duration may be less than 12
months.